Update the documentation about importing external certificates (#1598)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/installation-guide/partials/proc_importing-external-or-additional-tls-certificates.adoc

[id="importing-external-or-additional-tls-certificates_{context}"]

> = Importing external or additional TLS certificates to {prod-short}

Reviewer: Why "external or additional certificates"? Isn't "additional certificates" enough? Or even better "Importing untrusted TLS certificates to ...".

Author: Fixed

Author: in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/ea6c439a0885f8b83daae5d6a262c694632af853

> Network communications between the components of a {prod-short} installation and the started workspaces, are all secured through the TLS protocol, and thus require the use of trusted certificate authorities. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal communications between {prod-short} components are, by default, encrypted with TLS. Communications of {prod-short} components with external services like proxies, source code repositories, identity providers may require TLS tool. Those communications require the use of SSL certificates signed by trusted Certificate Authorities. 
```

> In some cases it can be necessary to add TLS certificates to the {prod-short} installation, so that every {prod-short} component will consider them as signed by a trusted CA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the certificates used by {prod-short} components or by an external service are signed by an untrusted CA it can be necessary to import the CA certificate in the {prod-short} installation, so that every {prod-short} component will consider them as signed by a trusted CA.
```

Typical cases that may require this addition are:

* when the underlying Kubernetes cluster uses TLS certificates signed by a CA that is not trusted,
* when {prod-short} server or workspace components connect to external services such as {identity-provider} or a Git server that use TLS certificates signed by an untrusted CA.

To store those certificates, {prod-short} uses a dedicated ConfigMap. Its default name is `ca-certs` but {prod-short} allows configuring its name.

> On OpenShift, the {prod-short} operator even injects cluster trusted certificates into this ConfigMap automatically.

Reviewer: IMHO the OpenShift case should be a `[NOTE]` and should provide more details:
- link to latest documentation that explains how the certs are propagated
- the labels/annotation that the operator applies so that the propagation happen
Also consider that when this documentation is downstreamed OpenShift is the only platform. This means that a sentence like "On OpenShift..." doesn't make sense because it's always on OpenShift.

Author: What do you think of this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/686586/97467202-3e61cf00-1944-11eb-8983-76d7f9d01c98.png)

The link you see in this screenshot points to  https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.4/networking/configuring-a-custom-pki.html#nw-proxy-configure-object_configuring-a-custom-pki

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/3f481ae07d585dc12a78fe6300ba5daea7659c93

== At {prod-short} installation time

.Prerequisites

* The `{orch-cli}` tool is available.
* You are ready to create `CheCluster` custom resource.

.Procedure

. Save the certificates you need to import, to a local file system.
+
[CAUTION]
====
* Certificate files are typically stored as Base64 ASCII files, such as `.pem`, `.crt`, `.ca-bundle`. But, they can also be binary-encoded, for example, as `.cer` files. All Secrets that hold certificate files should use the Base64 ASCII certificate rather than the binary-encoded certificate.
* {prod-short} already uses some reserved file names to automatically inject certificates into the ConfigMap, so you should avoid using the following reserved file names to save your certificates:
  ** `ca-bundle.crt`
  ** `ca.crt`

> ====

Reviewer: The paragraph above is repeated multiple times in this article. Can we move it to a different doc component and reference it multiple times?

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/3f481ae07d585dc12a78fe6300ba5daea7659c93

+
====
For a {prod-short} link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/latest/operators/olm-what-operators-are.html[Operator] deployment,
ensure you add the `spec.server.ServerTrustStoreConfigMapName` field with the name of the ConfigMap, to the `CheCluster` Custom Resource you will create during the installation:

[source,yaml,subs="+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----
spec:
  server:
    ...
    spec.server.ServerTrustStoreConfigMapName: ca-certs
----
====
ifeval::["{project-context}" == "che"]
+
====
For a {prod-short} link:https://helm.sh/[Helm Chart] deployment, ensure you override the `global.tls.serverTrustStoreConfigMapName` Helm Chart property with the name of the ConfigMap when installing the {prod-short} Helm Chart. For this you should add the following arguments to the Helm command line:
[subs="+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----
--set global.tls.serverTrustStoreConfigMapName=ca-certs
----
====
endif::[]

== On already-running {prod-short} installations

.Prerequisites

* The `{orch-cli}` tool is available.

> * You should first define the name of the ConfigMap you will use to import certificates:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You should first gather the name of the ConfigMap used to import certificates:
```

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/6d75512ae495960b96ee534fb64f7de41c0c91d6

+
====
On instances of {prod-short} deployed with the {prod-short} link:https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/latest/operators/olm-what-operators-are.html[Operator],
retrieve the name of the ConfigMap by reading the `spec.server.ServerTrustStoreConfigMapName` `CheCluster` Custom Resource property:

[subs="+attributes,+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----

> $ get checluster {prod-checluster} -n __<{project-context}-namespace-name>__ -o json-path --jsonpath={.spec.server.serverTrustStoreConfigMapName}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ {orch-cli} get checluster {prod-checluster} -n __<{project-context}-namespace-name>__ -o jsonpath={.spec.server.serverTrustStoreConfigMapName}
```

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/89c462e804f3d5d1b9df27933ffac38dca7b8250

. Edit the `spec.server.ServerTrustStoreConfigMapName` `CheCluster` Custom Resource property to match the name of the ConfigMap:
+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----
$ {orch-cli} patch checluster {prod-checluster} -n __<{project-context}-namespace-name>__ --type=json -p '[{"op": "replace", "path": "/spec/server/serverTrustStoreConfigMapName", "value": "<config-map-name>"}]'
----
+
====
ifeval::["{project-context}" == "che"]
+
====
For a {prod-short} link:https://helm.sh/[Helm Chart] deployment: 

. Clone the https://github.com/eclipse/che[che] project.
. Go to the `deploy/kubernetes/helm/che` directory.
. Update the name of the configMap {prod-short} will use, by editing the `global.tls.serverTrustStoreConfigMapName` Helm Chart property to match the created or updated ConfigMap:
+
[subs="+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----
$ helm upgrade che -n che --set global.tls.serverTrustStoreConfigMapName=<config-map-name> \
   --set global.ingressDomain=__<kubernetes-cluster-domain>__ .
----
+
When using Minikube to run {prod-short}, substitute _<kubernetes-cluster-domain>_ with `$(minikube ip).nip.io`.
====
endif::[]

> . Restart the {prod-short} operator, the {prod-short} server and {identity-provider} to load the new certificates:

Reviewer: I think that's not needed anymore after https://github.com/eclipse/che-operator/pull/487. You can specify that restart is not required on Che v7.20.0 or higher and CRW 2.5.0 or higher.

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/3a2f0520b241716f87b2764864c4cfa7b8ac6fa2

+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----

> $ {orch-cli} rollout restart -n __<{project-context}-namespace-name>__ deployment/{prod-id-short}-operator

Reviewer: `oc rollout restart` is not a valid command. 
`oc rollout latest` works only with deployment config (not deployments) 

I am afraid that we should always use `kubectl` instead of `{orch-cli}` here.

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/3a2f0520b241716f87b2764864c4cfa7b8ac6fa2

----
+
- {prod-short} mounts certificates in folder `/public-certs/` of the {prod-short} server container. This command returns the list of files in that folder:
+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----
$ {orch-cli} exec -t __<{prod-id-short}-pod-name>__ -n __<{project-context}-namespace-name>__ -- ls /public-certs/
----
+
- In the {prod-short} server logs there is a line for every certificate added to the Java truststore, including configured {prod-short} certificates.
+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----
$ {orch-cli} logs __<{prod-id-short}-pod-name>__ -n __<{project-context}-namespace-name>__
(...)
Found a custom cert. Adding it to java trust store based on /usr/lib/jvm/java-1.8.0/jre/lib/security/cacerts
(...)
----
+
- ${prod-short} server Java trustore contains the certificates. The certificates SHA1 fingerpints are among the list of the SHA1 of the certificates included in the trustore returned by the following command:
+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----

> $ {orch-cli} exec -t __<{prod-id-short}-pod-name>__ -n {prod-namespace} -- keytool -list -keystore /home/che/cacerts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ {orch-cli} exec -t __<{prod-id-short}-pod-name>__ -n {prod-namespace} -- keytool -list -keystore {prod-home}/cacerts
```

Author: Fixed in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/3a2f0520b241716f87b2764864c4cfa7b8ac6fa2

Your keystore contains 141 entries

(...)
----
+
To get the SHA1 hash of a certificate on the local filesystem:
+
[subs="+attributes,+quotes",options="nowrap",role=white-space-pre]
----
$ openssl x509 -in __<certificate-file-path>__ -fingerprint -noout
SHA1 Fingerprint=3F:DA:BF:E7:A7:A7:90:62:CA:CF:C7:55:0E:1D:7D:05:16:7D:45:60

> ----

Reviewer: A verification at the workspace level: what config maps are created? what theia expects (an env variable? files mounted in a given folder? etc...)

Author: The problem is that as far as what I tested on CRW 2.4.0 release, the additional certificates added into the Che operator `ca-certs` config map **are not propagated to the workspace**: According to tests, and also according to [the code itself on the master branch](https://github.com/eclipse/che/blob/master/infrastructures/openshift/src/main/java/org/eclipse/che/workspace/infrastructure/openshift/provision/Openshift4TrustedCAProvisioner.java#L81), the presence of a labelled `ca-certs` config map at the Che operator level, only triggers the creation of an **empty** `ca-certs` config map with the same annotation (used to inject OpenShift trusted CA bundles), but **without** the additional content that might have been manually added to the operator `ca-certs` config map.

So seems to completely invalidate the use of this config map to manage untrusted certificates that should be used also at the workspace level.

So maybe for now we should skip the workspace-related verification procedure and keep it for a future docs PR, when the propagation of the whole ca-certs CM content will be fixed.

@l0rd wdyt ?

Reviewer: But at least trusted CA bundle certs are injected in the cm right? That should be mentioned and we could add instructions to verify it. Please open an issue and notify deployment/platform teams.

Author: Verification steps at the workspace have been added in commit https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/1598/commits/96614f0174a3a113190f330001c439683a17d8db
